JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
Greek island
that has welcomed thousands of
migrants prepares
to welcome the pope. But some
question whether
his trip will do any good.
PANAYOTIS TSAGARIS, Theologian
(through translator):
We consider that the pope's
visit is little
more than a public relations
exercise, which
will not provide any real
solution to the
refugee problem facing not only
my island
and country, but also extending
to Europe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields
and David Brooks are here to
analyze last
night's fiery Democratic debate,
as is the
chairman of the Republican
National Committee,
Reince Priebus, to discuss the
strains in
the GOP.
Then: Violinist Rachel Barton
Pine takes classical
music to unexpected places and
people.
RACHEL BARTON PINE, Violinist:
If we only
played for the converted, we
would be not
honoring our gifts to the
fullest extent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is the final
weekend before
the all-important New York
primary, and the
presidential candidates,
Democrats and Republicans
alike, were on the go today.
Most traveled to towns and
cities across the
Empire State. One traveled
half-a-world away.
John Yang has the story.
MEN AND WOMEN: Bernie! Bernie!
Bernie!
JOHN YANG: They cheered Bernie
Sanders in
Rome, but it was Italy, not New
York. His
visit to the Vatican came just
hours after
the most combative Democratic
debate yet.
It was held in Brooklyn.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
I am sure a lot of people are
very surprised
to learn that you supported
raising the minimum
wage to 15 bucks an hour.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
You know, wait a minute, wait a
minute. Wait.
Come on.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: That's just
not accurate.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I have
stood on the
debate stage with Senator
Sanders eight prior
times.
(CROSSTALK)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I have
said the exact
same thing If we can raise it to
$15 in New
York or Los Angeles or Seattle,
let's do it.
(CROSSTALK)
WOLF BLITZER, CNN: If you're
both screaming
at each other, the viewers won't
be able to
hear either of you.
JOHN YANG: The animosity between
Sanders and
Hillary Clinton was clear, as
they clashed
on the minimum wage and her
relationship with
Wall Street.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I stood
up against
the behaviors of the banks when
I was a senator.
I called them out on their
mortgage behavior.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Secretary
Clinton called
them out. Oh, my goodness, they
must have
been really crushed by this.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: And was
that before or
after you received huge sums of
money by giving
speaking engagements?
JOHN YANG: Clinton called that a
phony attack
and slammed Sanders for voting
to shield gun
makers from some lawsuits.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: We hear
a lot from
Senator Sanders about the greed
and recklessness
of Wall Street. And I agree. We
have got to
hold Wall Street accountable.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Thank you
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well,
what about the
greed and recklessness of gun
manufacturers
and dealers in America?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Today, though, the
two candidates
were 4,000 miles apart, Clinton
visiting a
senior center in Harlem.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: It looks
like we're
in Las Vegas.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN YANG: And Sanders at a
Vatican conference,
assailing what he called an
economy operated
for the top 1 percent.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Pope
Francis has called
on the world to say -- and I
quote -- and
how profound, how important this
is -- "no
to a financial system that rules
rather than
serves."
JOHN YANG: Senator Sanders said
his campaign
detour was well worth it. The
high-profile
Vatican visit came just four
days before the
crucial New York primary, a
high-stakes race
for both parties.
Today, all three Republican
hopefuls fanned
out across the Empire State.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Good to be with you. Good to be
with you.
JOHN YANG: In Plattsburgh,
front-runner Donald
Trump kept hammering away,
hoping to hold
what polls show is a
double-digit lead.
DONALD TRUMP: I'm not one of
these politicians
that say, it doesn't matter if
you vote for
me or my opponent. It's so
important for the
American spirit for you to vote.
Well, let me just give you a
little hint.
If you want to vote for somebody
else, don't
vote, OK?
JOHN YANG: In Binghamton, Ted
Cruz knocked
Trump for complaining about the
delegate selection
process.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
It is not surprising when a
candidate loses
11 elections in a row, he's
unhappy about
it. And so he complains. And
that's fine.
Look, we're focused on winning
elections with
the people.
JOHN YANG: John Kasich also
campaigned in
New York today, with events in
Watertown and
Utica.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bernie Sanders
also said at
last night's debate that he's
releasing his
2014 tax returns. Hillary
Clinton says she's
released 30 years of returns,
but she declined
to issue transcripts of her paid
speeches
to banks unless other candidates
do likewise.
In the day's other news,
President and Mrs.
Obama released their federal tax
return for
this past year. They paid
$81,000 in taxes
on income of $436,000. The
couple donated
15 percent of what they made to
charity.
Lawmakers in Brazil began debate
today on
whether to impeach President
Dilma Rousseff.
She's accused of corruption in a
political
drama that's all but paralyzed
the country.
Impeachment proponents argued
today that Rousseff's
political maneuvering has led to
Brazil's
high inflation and currency
devaluations.
MIGUEL REALE JR., Author of
Impeachment Legislation
(through translator): Which is
the most serious
crime, a crime where a president
puts in her
pocket a sum of money, on that
president which,
due to the hunger for power, in
search of
maintaining power, sees no
limits in destroying
the Brazilian economy?
JUDY WOODRUFF: The impeachment
charges allege
that Rousseff doctored her
government's financial
accounting to win public
support. But defenders,
including former President Lula
da Silva,
insisted today she has done
nothing wrong.
LUIZ INACIO LULA DA SILVA,
Former Brazilian
President (through translator):
I am convinced
that the impeachment will not be
approved.
To topple a government that was
democratically
elected without any proof of any
fiscal crime
is not going to fix anything.
All it will
do is make the crisis even
worse. Nobody will
be able to govern a country with
200 million
people without being legitimized
by the popular
vote.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The house vote
there is slated
for Sunday. If it passes, the
Brazilian senate
would decide whether to hold a
trial of Rousseff.
North Korea tried today to
launch a mid-range
missile, one with a capacity to
reach U.S.
bases in Japan and Guam, but it
blew up. The
Pentagon called it a
catastrophic failure.
The missile test came as the
North celebrated
the birthday of the late Kim
Il-Sung, founder
of the communist state. His
grandson, Kim
Jong-un, is the current leader
of North Korea.
A powerful new earthquake has
hit Southern
Japan, on the heels of one that
killed nine
people Thursday night. There
were no immediate
reports of casualties this time.
NHK television
showed the moment the shaking
began, early
Saturday morning, and triggered
a tsunami
advisory. The alert was later
lifted, but
the quake did leave collapsed
buildings and
cracked roads.
One hundred and fifty countries
geared up
today for a final push to
eliminate polio
around the world. The effort
begins Sunday,
and the World Health
Organization says it
is possible to stop all
transmission of the
crippling disease within a year.
To do that,
the campaign will target the
last few areas
of risk.
MICHEL ZAFFRAN, World Health
Organization:
The virus travels without any
barrier, so
if we do not eradicate the
virus, if we don't
get rid of it, we will quite
rapidly go back
to the situation we had before
we started
the eradication program. And we
could have
hundreds of thousands of cases
of the polio
disease around the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There have been
only 12 cases
of polio reported worldwide this
year, in
Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Islamist militants
there have attacked immunization
teams, accusing
them of being Western spies.
Back in this country, the
governor of Mississippi
signed a law permitting guns in
churches.
A holstered gun sat on top of a
Bible as Governor
Phil Bryant held the signing
ceremony. Designated
church members may be trained to
provide armed
security for their
congregations.
President Obama announced today
that he will
support giving cable TV
customers more choices
on cable boxes. As it is, most
people lease
the boxes from a cable company.
The Federal
Communications Commission wants
to let them
buy elsewhere and possibly get a
better price.
The president also today ordered
up a report
on increasing competition in the
industry.
On Wall Street today, the Dow
Jones industrial
average lost about 29 points to
close at 17897.
The Nasdaq fell seven, and the
S&P 500 slid
two. For the week, all three
indexes added
nearly 2 percent.
And it is must-see TV in Norway
for those
seeking relief from fast-paced
daily life.
On May 20, public broadcaster
NRK will televise
the world's strongest tidal
current for 12
hours live and uninterrupted. It
is a strait
just north of the Arctic Circle
where seawater
flows at 25 miles an hour.
Previous shows
included footage of a train
ride, a canal
cruise and a knitting tutorial,
and all were
viewer hits.
Maybe we should try those in the
United States.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Microsoft's
president explains why his
company is suing
the U.S. government; GOP Chair
Reince Priebus
on the rules for selecting a
presidential
nominee; Mark Shields and David
Brooks take
on the week's news; a preview of
the pope's
visit to a refuge camp in Greece
-- can he
make a difference?; and how
violinist Rachel
Barton Pine became an evangelist
for classical
music.
Now: a high-profile showdown
between a tech
giant and the U.S. government
over accessing
private data.
This time, it's Microsoft.
Yesterday, the
company filed a suit against the
Department
of Justice in federal court.
Microsoft argues
it's unconstitutional for the
government to
ask for customers' personal data
or e-mails
in most cases without the
individuals' knowledge.
The company says it's received
more than 5,600
requests for such data from the
government
in the last year-and-a-half,
often from the
cloud or remote servers. And
nearly half of
those requests come with a ban
from the government
on alerting customers.
Brad Smith is the president of
Microsoft.
He joins me from company
headquarters in Redmond,
Washington.
And welcome to the program, Brad
Smith.
I do want to point out we
invited the Department
of Justice to join the
interview, but they
declined.
So, let me begin by asking you,
what is it
that the federal government is
doing that
Microsoft doesn't like?
BRAD SMITH, President,
Microsoft: Well, what
gives us concern is the fact we
have received
almost 2,600 -- almost 2,600 of
these so-called
gag or secrecy orders over the
last 18 months.
Over two-thirds of them have no
end date at
all. So it means that we are
permanently prohibited
from telling customers that the
government
has accessed, read and obtained
copies of
their e-mails. We feel that
infringes on the
constitutional rights of
consumers and businesses
to be secure from unreasonable
government
searches.
It infringes on our First
Amendment right
to speak, to share information
with our customers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know the
Justice Department
has not responded to the
lawsuit. They have
not said anything publicly, but
we know that
in the past they have said these
are investigations
that involve criminals, people
who are breaking
the law, that involve -- that
are perhaps
involved in potential terrorist
acts.
Why not work with the government
when they're
trying to go after the bad guys?
BRAD SMITH: Well, this is an
issue that we
have discussed with various
officials in government
for some time.
And we readily recognize that
there are many
cases where there should be some
kind of secrecy,
that there is a real danger if
information
is disclosed. But we feel that
these kinds
of secrecy orders have been --
become too
routine. They're being issued in
cases that
involve businesses, as well as
consumers.
And it especially concerns us
that there is
no end date. Let's face it.
Forever is a long
time. Even military secrets are
declassified
eventually. Why should we have a
country where
people will never learn that the
government
has accessed their e-mails?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I was
reading today that
some investigators who have
worked on, I guess,
in this area have said that if
you notify
people who are being
investigated, you run
the risk that they are going to
change their
communication pattern, they're
going to tamper
with evidence. They may even try
to leave
the country. What about that?
BRAD SMITH: Well, that really
goes to the
point that, yes, there are times
when a nondisclosure
order is a sensible thing to do.
But the law in this case does,
in our view,
not require the government to
make the kind
of compelling showing that it
should, and,
hence, the government is getting
these kinds
of orders in too many cases. And
even in cases
where this kind of secrecy is
needed, eventually,
the need for secrecy goes away.
And yet, even then, people will
never learn
that the government accessed
their e-mail.
And that, as much as anything,
really runs,
we think, right into the
constitutional protections
we all should enjoy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brad Smith, what
do you say
to those who look at this and
say, well, this
is just an effort to do what's
good for business,
rather than what's good for the
American people,
for the American government?
BRAD SMITH: Well, I think this
is fundamentally
about what is good for people
and their rights.
It is good for technology. It is
good for
businesses who are customers as
well, whose
e-mails are being read.
But, most importantly, I think
it's about
one thing. It's about ensuring
the kinds of
values that we have had in this
country under
the Constitution for 230 years
remain intact
even as technology changes, and
information
that we have long stored on
paper is now stored
in the cloud instead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did you think
about another
course of action other than
filing suit? Did
you try to sit down with the
government and
talk to them about what they're
doing?
BRAD SMITH: We have had multiple
conversations
about these and similar issues.
And this lawsuit
doesn't for an instant mean that
those kinds
of conversations should come to
an end.
I definitely believe that,
ultimately, across
the technology sphere, it's
going to take
a lot of good discussion to find
new solutions.
But we have found in recent
cases that things
were going the wrong way, not
the right way,
and there does come a point when
you just
have to put a stake in the
ground and say
that these constitutional rights
matter, and
we need the courts to intervene.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there a middle
ground, though?
Is there some -- something, some
level of
information the government could
share with
you that would make you
comfortable turning
this individual's e-mails over
to them without
notifying the individual?
BRAD SMITH: I think we always
have to ask
ourselves at the end of the day,
is there
some kind of middle ground that
might emerge?
And I think the answer is
probably yes.
If we look at other statutes in
other areas
of federal law, there is
typically a right
for the government in the right
circumstances
to keep something secret for 30
days or 90
days, and, if the need
continues, the government
can go back, and it has to make
its case before
a magistrate yet again.
I think that if we could move
this area of
the law to be more like that
kind of area,
we'd find a middle ground
emerge.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just finally,
there are
some who are looking at this and
saying, is
this some kind of a turning
point in this,
I guess, larger tech industry --
battle with
the tech industry -- battle with
the government
on the part of the tech industry
over privacy,
over the citizens' privacy?
BRAD SMITH: Well, I think we're
living in
a time where it feels like there
is a turning
point every other month.
When I step back from it all, I
think what
we're seeing is this evolution
of technology,
people storing things digitally,
storing them
in data centers. And across the
board, whether
you're in government or you're
in the tech
sector, we're all trying to find
a path, so
that the traditional values we
have had in
this country, the traditional
rights we have
enjoyed, will remain, so that
information
that's stored in the cloud gets
the same kind
of protection as information
stored on paper.
That, I think, is what we need
to continue
to seek.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brad Smith, the
president of
Microsoft, we thank you for
talking with us.
BRAD SMITH: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today, Republican
presidential
front-runner Donald Trump
continued to attack
his own party's process for
choosing a presidential
nominee, a system he says is
rigged.
For more on that, the chairman
of the Republican
National Committee, Reince
Priebus, joins
me now.
And, Reince Priebus, we welcome
you to the
program.
What do you say? Donald Trump
has been saying
this for days. I heard him say
it again in
Syracuse, New York, just a few
hours ago.
What do you say? I mean, this is
a very serious
charge he's making, that the
process is crooked.
REINCE PRIEBUS, Republican
National Committee
Chairman: Well, I don't know how
serious the
charge is.
And I'm not sure how much is
rhetoric, and
-- but the truth is, is that the
process is
the same process it's been for
decades. But
the reality is, no one actually
cared about
how delegates were allocated.
Each state has
the opportunity to choose the
method by which
they allocate delegates to the
national convention.
Some states have primaries. Some
states have
caucuses, and some states have
actual conventions
where delegates are voted on.
These are things
that have been set in place
since October
of 2015. All the candidates have
been briefed.
They have all been aware of the
rules. They're
out there for the whole world to
see.
There is nothing mysterious
about it. And,
by the way, no one complained
either before
Colorado, before the result. It
was only after
the results did we get a single
complaint
about the process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
Well, let me read -- you're
familiar with
this, but let me read you what
Donald Trump
said about Colorado. He said:
"When I joined
the campaign in June," he said,
"they had
a system. He said, "After they
saw I was going
to win in Colorado, they changed
the system."
And he said the people in
Colorado didn't
know that their votes were going
to be taken
away from them.
REINCE PRIEBUS: Well, and that
statement has
been debunked by many people.
Colorado had a convention the
last time. Colorado
used to have what we call beauty
contests.
In other words, there weren't
elections. It
was a straw poll that didn't
award any delegates
to anyone, and so it had no
value, no use
of a straw poll, so they dumped
the straw
poll.
And they went to the straight-up
convention.
So -- and, By the way, 60,000
people competed
in Colorado in the precinct
level contest.
Then those people moved to a
county contest.
congressional
district contest. And then they
moved to a
state convention contest, where
all the candidates
participated.
They had surrogates speaking. No
one along
the way said, hey, I don't
really like the
way this is going. I don't
really like this
kind of system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it is...
REINCE PRIEBUS: And now, all of
a sudden...
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was just going
to say, but
it is the case, if you look at
state after
state after state, the process
is different
in virtually every one of the 50
states. It's
not a simple thing.
You have to be some kind of an
expert to understand
all this. Is it really
democratic anymore?
And I mean with a small D.
REINCE PRIEBUS: Of course it is.
It's the same method that we
have been using,
and the Democrats use the same
delegate method.
We're not a public entity. We're
an organization
that is made up of members
across this country
and state parties. State parties
have a right
to determine how each of their
delegates get
to go to the national
convention.
You know, 150 years ago,
delegates ran in
the states, and they just went
to the convention
and they voted, and they set
rules and they
vote for officers. It's a real
convention.
It's not a four-day party. It's
just that
no one ever watches what happens
during the
day at these conventions, when
rules are voted
on and there is actual business
that goes
on.
It's no different than when the
Boy Scouts
have a convention...
JUDY WOODRUFF: But when...
REINCE PRIEBUS: ... or when the
Kiwanis have
an election. They get together,
and they vote
on officers and they have an
election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But when -- I
think what Mr.
Trump is -- and others have made
this point
-- that when the person who gets
the most
votes in a primary or a caucus
doesn't end
with the most delegates, or at
least not a
proportional percentage of those
delegates,
something smells.
REINCE PRIEBUS: Yes, but they do
end up with
the most delegates. They do.
In the case of Florida, Donald
Trump won about
-- in the mid-50s percentage of
the vote.
He won 100 percent of the
delegates. I didn't
hear a lot of complaining about
that. The
reality is, is that the bound
delegates that
are awarded to the candidates
are absolutely
bound to those candidates. They
don't lose
that support.
They are bound to the candidate,
no matter
what. Even if they don't like
the candidate,
they have to vote for that
candidate. What
the problem comes in that you're
hearing complaining
about is the unbound delegates,
who's getting
the unbound delegates. And that
is a separate
issue.
That is an issue of each
campaign going into
each of these states and
competing for those
unbound delegates. But they're
not losing
anything, unbound delegates to
the national
convention, not one thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I think not
everybody
understands the difference
between bound and
unbound.
But I do want to move on and ask
you this.
Donald Trump's central argument
seems to be
that the American -- I mean, is
-- that the
American system is -- political
system, is
rigged. He talks about, it's the
consultants,
it's the pollsters, it's the
party, what he
calls the party bosses who are
running things.
He says the politicians have
grown rich and
powerful; ordinary people are
left behind.
Do you agree with his really
central thesis
here?
REINCE PRIEBUS: Well, sure, I
think a lot
of people agree with -- I think
all -- I think
the actual -- all the
candidates. I mean,
I think those are themes that I
think everyone
can relate to. So I don't
quarrel with that.
But in regard to whether or not
a national
party has a right to set the
rules as to how
a nominee is chosen from a party
is unquestionable.
I mean, these candidates, what
are they doing?
They are competing to see which
one of these
people are going to be chosen by
the voters
and the delegates of our party.
One of them is going to be
chosen. I'm not
competing for one of them.
They're competing
to join the Republican Party.
They can compete
to join whatever party they want
to join,
but if they want to join the
Republican Party,
then they have to play by the
rules of the
Republican Party, and I can't
imagine any
controversy about that
whatsoever.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, just quickly,
then, are
you ruling out somebody being
chosen, nominated
at the convention who didn't run
in the primaries?
REINCE PRIEBUS: They would be
chosen -- if
any -- if a majority of the
delegates at the
convention choose a person to be
the nominee
of our party, they will be the
nominee of
our party.
Now, I find that to be highly,
highly unlikely.
I have said that many times.
Certainly, Donald
Trump and Ted Cruz have great
advantages.
But, ultimately, they have to or
John Kasich
or whoever has to be able to get
the majority
of delegates on the floor of the
convention
to be the nominee of our party.
And we will support that nominee
at the Republican
National Committee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Reince Priebus,
the chairman
of the Republican National
Committee, thank
you very much.
REINCE PRIEBUS: You bet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we turn
to the analysis
of Shields and Brooks. That is
syndicated
columnist Mark Shields and New
York Times
columnist David Brooks.
So, Mark, what did you make of
Mr. Priebus'
comment about Donald Trump's
complaint?
MARK SHIELDS: Reince Priebus is
right. The
parties, state parties, choose
the rules,
establish them. Those rules have
been set
since last August. They're not
particularly
appealing rules in Colorado.
Fewer than 1
percent of the 900,000
registered Republicans
of the state even were able to
participate
in the choice.
But those rules have been
available. I mean,
the irony of this whole thing to
me, Judy,
is that Donald Trump has run as
the guy who's
going to be the tough,
no-nonsense negotiator.
His election sends nervous knees
in Beijing
and Tokyo. And here he is
getting rolled by
the Colorado State Republican
Party, which,
in the last 42 years, has
managed to win the
governorship with one candidate
in 42 years,
and twice lost the state to
Barack Obama.
If you can't and negotiate and
outnegotiate
and outwit, and if you're going
to get flummoxed
by dealing with the state
Republican Party
of Colorado, I don't know how
you're going
to negotiate these tough trade
deals with
China and Japan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
it, David? Donald
Trump just keeps hammering away
at this argument
that the process is -- it's
rigged, it's crooked.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. Well, as
others pointed
out, as a businessman, he was
perfectly willing
to use the amoral bankruptcy
laws to his own
advantage. And now he's just
getting outfoxed
I'm the amoral delegate laws. I
think that
they're...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did you say
amoral delegate
laws?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, they're just
-- the laws
are the way they are.
But I think, A, they're in touch
with the
American tradition. We do not
live in a straight-up
Athenian democracy. We live in a
republic.
We have an Electoral College. We
have a United
States Senate where the two
senators from
Wyoming have the same power as
the two senators
from California.
And we have, in that tradition
and that spirit,
we have a delegate selection
process where
it's just not a straight-up
democracy, where,
as Reince said, it's -- every
big organization,
whether it's General Motors or
the Boy Scouts,
they have an organizational
structure in which
they make decisions.
And the people who are more
invested in the
organization, are more senior in
the organization
have more power than the people
who are not.
And that's for very good reason.
It's because
you want a party to have
consistency over
time. You want it to have a
structure where
people have to compromise with
each other.
And basically you want it to
have a series
of stability, so you don't get
carried away
by momentary fads and crazy
demagogues. So,
by some logic, this structure
exists to prevent
Donald Trump and people like
Donald Trump,
who are of the moment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But is it smart,
Mark, for
Donald Trump to keep talking
about this process?
Because he's not giving up on
this line of...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: I don't think it
is.
I mean, it obviously gets a
great response
from the crowd that it's rigged,
and this
has been obviously a theme of
his, that the
whole system is rigged, the
economic system,
the political system.
But I don't think Donald Trump
does well as
a victim. I mean, he's the guy
that's going
to be, you know, the new sheriff
in town.
He's going to come in and kick
tail and take
names. And this is where he
looks a little
bit victimized. And I just don't
-- I don't
think it works.
The rules of the parties, Judy,
do have -- I
think there is a public interest
in how they
do it. I mean, the Democratic
Party changed
after 1968, when it was
determined -- a major
anti-war movement emerged in
that year to
challenge President Johnson's
reelection and
renomination, and it turned out
that more
than half the delegation --
delegates had
been chosen two years earlier.
So the process wasn't open and
not available.
And they made the process more
open and available.
But it is still autonomous to
each state how
to set the rules. Colorado did a
lousy job
of setting the rules. And
there's no question
that both South Carolina and
Georgia Republicans,
where Trump won convincing
victories, they're
already -- the delegates are
conspiring to
dump him as soon as they can on
the second
ballot.
So there is a legitimate point
of view, I
think, he's raised. I don't
think it works
for him politically.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You agree he
doesn't gain anything
by this?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, it's the
only argument
he has, so he might as well use
it. It's an
effective argument.
It's not like -- if he was
winning, he wouldn't
be complaining. But it's the
argument that
the situation presented. So, I
would point
out that, as we have gotten more
open in our
selection process, I'm not sure
the candidates
are any better. Abraham Lincoln
was pretty
good. He was very...
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: Franklin
Roosevelt.
MARK SHIELDS: That's the old
smoke-filled
rooms.
DAVID BROOKS: I like
smoke-filled rooms.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
But you were saying it's the
only argument
he can make at this point,
meaning he's behind
in the delegate -- and figuring
out how to
pick up delegates, and this is
all he can
do right now.
MARK SHIELDS: He has got two
million more
votes than anybody else. He's
won more primaries
and more delegates.
I wouldn't -- I don't think this
is a time
we pass the hat and hold a
benefit for Donald
Trump. He's about to win New
York convincingly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MARK SHIELDS: He's been ahead in
Pennsylvania.
I think the people who have been
endorsing
candidates have been moving in
his direction.
He's stronger than he certainly
was when he
lost Wisconsin.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
To me, it's a confusing moment,
because in
the delegate process, Ted Cruz
has a clear
-- has not a clear path, but a
path where
if he can deny Trump the
majority on the first
ballot, and Cruz is looking
pretty good -- the
delegates keep racking up for
him.
On the public votes, though,
Trump is rising
in the national polls. He's
going to have
a whole series of wins. Cruz is
dropping in
national polls. He could come in
third in
New York and a lot of other
places. And so
you really have a bifurcation.
The delegate
race really does look like it's
leaning a
little Cruz's way, but not the
vote. So, in
that sense, it's disjointed.
MARK SHIELDS: His argument is a
plausible
argument.
I mean, the people are choosing
one way, and
the delegates are going the
other.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
about the
Democrats.
There was a pretty wild debate,
Mark, last
night between Hillary Clinton
and Bernie Sanders.
What did you make of it? It was
-- it got
hot at several moments.
MARK SHIELDS: It did.
Gone is the cordiality and
mutual respect
of the earlier debates. I mean,
this may very
well have been the last time the
two candidates
are on the same stage together,
and they -- it
couldn't be over quick enough. I
think that
there was an intensity in the
evening.
If I could make one suggestion
to both parties,
is that you don't have crowds at
the debates,
pep rally crowds. I think it
brings out the
worst in candidates, and they
start playing
to the room, and getting cheers
and hoops
and huzzahs and all the rest of
it.
But, no, it was a -- Hillary
Clinton, Bernie
Sanders, neither one of them
came upon it
as particularly warm or likable.
I think that's
fair to stay. I think Bernie
Sanders may be
the most disciplined candidate I
have ever
seen. I mean, he stays on
message very well.
And Secretary Clinton showed
herself -- could
take a punch and keep standing.
I mean, she
certainly is -- there's a
toughness about
her. But she doesn't have an
answer for the
Goldman Sachs and the
transcripts...
JUDY WOODRUFF: The speeches.
MARK SHIELDS: ... and speeches
and so forth.
I mean, she said let others
reveal their transcripts.
I don't know any other
candidates for president
who get a quarter-of-a-million
dollars for
speaking to Goldman Sachs.
DAVID BROOKS: The Goldman Sachs
thing is so
typical of Hillary Clinton.
Remember the Rose Law Firm
papers that showed
up, like, mysteriously in the
middle of the
White House on the table after
years? She
will delay and delay and delay
until it maximally
hurts her, and then she will
release. And
she just has this pattern of
secrecy.
I do not think the Goldman Sachs
thing is
going to hurt her in a general
election. Democratic
voters care about that stuff.
Donald Trump
would love to be partners with
Goldman Sachs.
Most independent general
election voters want
their kids to go work at Goldman
Sachs. I
don't think that's going to hurt
her.
I do think -- I'm sort of struck
by the way
Sanders has not really widened
his critique.
I thought one -- a pivotal
moment early in
the campaign is when he didn't
go after the
e-mails, which he -- at that
moment, he left
-- shut off an avenue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
DAVID BROOKS: And, secondly, he
could really
go on a class critique of her,
that she's
living in a fancy house, she's
eating in fancy
restaurants, she's of the --
she's not only
of the establishment. She's of
the 1 percent.
And he -- that could be a very
big social,
but not on discreet issues like
the Goldman
Sachs speech, on her whole life.
And he really
has not widened it out and,
frankly, been
as aggressive as he might be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That would be
taking it to
a personal level, wouldn't it?
MARK SHIELDS: I will say this.
Bernie Sanders has been urged to
do that on
the e-mails. And...
JUDY WOODRUFF: To go after the
e-mails.
MARK SHIELDS: Go out for that.
And he made
the decision not to. That wasn't
what his
candidacy and his campaign was
about, is what
he said.
And he -- to his credit, he's --
what everyone
says, he has dominated the
conversation, I
mean, that the movement by
candidates in this
race has been toward Bernie
Sanders' positions,
not toward anybody else's. So, I
mean, in
that sense, it was a disciplined
decision.
And it was a -- and it obviously
makes it
easier.
I agree with David that the
Goldman Sachs
transcripts are not of great
interest to Republican
voters who -- on such things.
But he could
have just belted her on that. He
could have
run TV spots on that, and he
hasn't. He's
chosen not to go at a personal
level.
DAVID BROOKS: It may be
admirable, but the
point that Mark said I would
like to underline
is the way movement of the
debate is.
I mean, you look at these
issues. And the
big one this time was with
minimum wage...
MARK SHIELDS: Minimum wage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
DAVID BROOKS: ... where she
suddenly flowed
to $15.
I personally think a $15 minimum
wage makes
total sense in San Francisco,
but it's completely
crazy in large parts of the
country. And she
has made that point. She was for
$12 minimum
wage. Going up to $15 is way
above anything
we have ever done historically.
I think it
would really lead to historic
job losses for
the least educated and least
skilled.
But, nonetheless, that's where
the debate
is going, and she's sort of
being dragged
along on issue after issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think
either one of
them, Mark, helped themselves
materially or
hurt themselves materially last
night?
MARK SHIELDS: I don't know.
I think Sanders played very well
in the room.
I don't how much he played. I
don't he's cracked
into her non-white support in
New York or
anyplace else. I think his
decision to go
to Rome probably made sense to
-- because
it plays to his issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meeting at the
Vatican.
MARK SHIELDS: To the Vatican.
I mean, the pope is the most --
according
to the most recent Gallup of 64
nations, the
most admired, most popular
figure in the world,
and is most popular among
Catholics, Jews.
He's got a majority approval
among agnostics
and atheists. You put those four
groups together,
you ought to win a New York
Democratic primary.
But if the pope is not going to
endorse you,
you endorse the pope. And you
could say this
has been a Pope Francis primary,
in the sense
of economic inequality and
economic justice
being central.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... you mention
that, because
some people criticize Sanders
for being off
the trail just a few days before
the New York
primary.
But, very quickly, David, does
all of this
lead to something for Bernie
Sanders? Does
it help him move toward
unthroning -- dethroning
Hillary Clinton?
DAVID BROOKS: He would have to
win in New
York, I think.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: And it's very hard
to see, given
where the polls are.
But it does make her look bad. I
think, if
you're in your home state and
you're being
pummeled in this way, it just
seeps even more
of the little glow out of her
campaign. It's
just a dogged, dogged race for
her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks,
Mark Shields,
thank you both.
Speaking of the pope, he is due
to head to
the Greek island of Lesbos
tomorrow to see
for himself the extent of the
refugee crisis.
He plans to visit a detention
camp where some
of the migrants are being held,
pending possible
deportation. That's according to
terms of
a deal signed last month between
the European
Union and Turkey.
So, just how important is this
visit?
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports
from Lesbos.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Another day of
uncertainty
begins on an island that once
offered hope
to hundreds of thousands seeking
security,
protection or prosperity.
But the estimated 4,000 migrants
currently
stranded on Lesbos worry that
their foothold
in Europe is more tenuous than
ever. This
island is now a place of
despair. Human rights
groups regard it as an open
prison for people
desperate to avoid being sent
back across
the stretch of water that
claimed so many
lives.
George Kosmopoulos of Amnesty
International:
GEORGE KOSMOPOULOS, Director,
Amnesty International
Greece: We hope that the visit
of the pope
will highlight both the
solidarity, the great
solidarity shown by the Greek
people and people
from all over the world to
refugees in Lesbos,
in Mytilini, but also will shed
some light
additionally to the problems, to
the big problems
with regards the implementation
of the E.U.-Turkey
deal, in the rushed attempt of
Greece to proceed
with a deal that is both
dangerous and illegal,
in our view.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In preparation
for the pope's
visit, they were whitewashing
the walls of
the detention camp and covering
up graffiti
expressing support for the
migrants.
Whenever dignitaries come to
look at the refugee
crisis for themselves, the Greek
authorities
do what they can to sanitize the
situation.
When actress and U.N. Refugee
Agency special
envoy Angelina Jolie visited,
the razor wire
for the detention center was
conveniently
taken down and put straight up
as soon as
she left.
In the run-up to the pope's
visit, all deportations
to Turkey have stopped. But I'm
told by sources
at the E.U.'s border agency,
Frontex, that
they will resume early next
week.
Human rights advocates are
highly critical
of conditions in this so-called
hot spot,
where asylum-seekers are
supposed to be processed.
The police weren't keen on us
getting too
close.
MAN: It's not allowed.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Why not?
MAN: Stop the shooting.
MAN: Sir, it's not allowed.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Why not?
MAN: Problem. Close. Close.
Close.
MALCOLM BRABANT: OK. All right.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Eva Cosse of
Human Rights
Watch was also prevented from
entering, but
interviewed people through the
fence.
Her organization and others
believe the detentions
are arbitrary and unjust.
EVA COSSE, Human Rights Watch:
What's wrong?
First, there are large, large
numbers of vulnerable
groups being detained there.
We interviewed families with
young children,
people with disabilities, people
with mental
health problems, pregnant women
who are really
suffering inside there, because
there are
no services. Since the
implementation of the
E.U.-Turkey deal, NGOs withdrew
from the detention
facilities, in line with their
policies not
to work in closed facilities. So
there is
a big lack of services for those
people.
MALCOLM BRABANT: An alarm goes
off at the
phone recharging center at
another, more relaxed
and better-equipped refugee
camp. It's the
Muslim call to prayer.
Sitting nearby is Murteza
Hasainzada, a tailor
from Kabul. Having spent
$10,000, he arrived
in Lesbos after Europe made it
clear through
the deal with Turkey that it was
no longer
wide-open to all comers. He's
not too sure
what the pope can do, but he
will take any
help that will stop him from
being deported.
MURTEZA HASAINZADA, Refugee: I
don't want
to go back. I say, until they
open the borders,
I am -- stay here, and I don't
want to go
back.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The same
unwillingness to
accept the new reality is
evident in a conversation
between a visiting Danish
politician and a
Palestinian asylum-seeker,
Yousef Hammad,
who fled Gaza after being jailed
for six months
by the radical Hamas government.
He also arrived
in Lesbos after Europe pulled
down the shutters.
YOUSEF HAMMAD, Refugee: I don't
like to think
about the situation about going
back, maybe,
like, stay here just good.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The Danish
politician, former
center-left Interior Minister
Morten Ostergaard,
is concerned that
asylum-seekers' rights under
international law are possibly
being breached,
but doubts whether Pope Francis
is the catalyst
for change.
MORTEN OSTERGAARD, Former Danish
Interior
Minister: At least what I think
that the pope
can do is perhaps shed a bit of
hope in the
people who are desperate. But,
politically,
it's up to people like me and
the political
leaders in the European Union to
make a difference.
We can't let -- leave that to
the pope.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And this is
Spyros Galinos,
the mayor of Lesbos, who was
instrumental
in inviting the pope to draw
attention to
the plight of the refugees and
the islanders'
burden.
SPYROS GALINOS, Mayor of Lesbos,
Greece: It
is a visit of enormous symbolic
importance.
And we hope that all governments
will follow
the pope's lead and finally move
in the right
direction for all the peoples of
Europe.
MALCOLM BRABANT: On a religious
level, the
pope's visit is fraught with
difficulties.
The Catholic and Orthodox
churches split cataclysmically
1,000 years ago, and are still
unable to resolve
differences.
There are some forces within
orthodoxy that
are seeking reconciliation, but
leading theologian
Panayotis Tsagaris is skeptical.
PANAYOTIS TSAGARIS, Theologian
(through translator):
We consider that the pope's
visit is little
more than a public relations
exercise which
will not provide any real
solution to the
refugee problem facing not only
my island
and country, but also extending
to Europe.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The fraught
history between
the two churches has even led
some ultra-conservative
religious leaders to call the
papal mission
a stab in the back. One
archbishop expressed
concern that hiding among the
migrants are
Islamic extremists on a mission
to undermine
Europe and its traditions.
But on the waterfront in
Greece's main port,
Piraeus, their Orthodox Church
is demonstrating
its willingness to reach across
the religious
divide. Every day, the church's
charity, Apostoli,
distributes 1,000 meals to
asylum-seekers
living rough on the harbor.
Spokeswoman Despina Katsivelaki
rejects the
Islamophobic wing of orthodoxy.
DESPINA KATSIVELAKI, Apostoli
(through translator):
We help human beings, regardless
of their
race, religion, color,
nationality. That's
what we do. That's our role and
aim, and that's
what we try to succeed in doing.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Although the
islanders are
desperate for the human tide to
diminish,
there's profound empathy for
people escaping
conflict and trying to improve
themselves,
because Greeks have a similar
history.
Father Athanasios Giousmas is
the chief priest
at the Exquisite Church in
Mytilini, Lesbos'
main town.
FATHER ATHANASIOS GIOUSMAS,
Exquisite Church
(through translator): This is
why we have
such mixed feelings within
ourselves, not
only pain for these refugees,
but also agony
about what is likely to happen
generally,
and in this country, together
with disgust
-- and forgive me for saying so
-- but disgust,
not only for the world leaders,
but also those
here in Greece.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Despite
misgivings about
the E.U.-Turkey accord, it seems
to be working
as its deal-makers intended. The
numbers of
arrivals are substantially down.
Spanish lifeguards have returned
from patrols
empty-handed for nearly two
weeks. The Turks
are either upholding their end
of the bargain,
or the boats are being
intercepted by the
E.U. border agency.
The big question is, will the
despair on Lesbos
filter back down the migrant
trail and deter
the throng, or will they find
new routes to
reach their goal?
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Lesbos.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there will be
more on the
pope's visit to Lesbos on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend,"
right here on most of these PBS
stations.
Next: music with a purpose, a
story about
a violinist charting her own
musical path.
Jeffrey Brown tells us exactly
how her music
is hitting the spirit.
JEFFREY BROWN: It was an
unlikely setting
for a classical music
performance: a homeless
shelter, the Community for
Creative Non-Violence,
in the shadow of the nation's
capital, where
concert violinist Rachel Barton
Pine played
a special engagement for the
residents.
There was music from many eras
and styles.
Along the way, Pine offered bits
of musical
history.
RACHEL BARTON PINE, Violinist:
So, Mozart
was from Germany from the late
1700s.
JEFFREY BROWN: And told them a
bit about herself.
RACHEL BARTON PINE: And we were
often one
missed payment away from losing
the roof over
our heads, which was the
scariest thing of
all when I was a little kid.
JEFFREY BROWN: Pine, in fact,
knows something
of the plight of her audience.
Her father
was mostly unemployed, and the
family had
to scrape by.
RACHEL BARTON PINE: So, We had
these three
sort of grocery crates rescued
from the garbage
and this one little electric
heater. And I
would rotate it every 10
minutes, so that,
as part of me was warming up and
thawing,
another part would be starting
to freeze.
But we had to do unusual things,
like get
my concert clothes from a thrift
store and
try to fix them up to be
something presentable
for stage.
JEFFREY BROWN: These days, Pine
tours the
world a good part of the year,
traveling with
her husband, Greg, who serves as
her manager,
and their 4-year-old daughter.
But she feels a pull to give
back wherever
she goes.
RACHEL BARTON PINE: Sometimes, I
go to hospitals.
I have even been to prisons, and
just wherever
music can uplift people's
spirits. That's
the meaning of being a musician.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you have a
life on the
road that is different, in the
sort of traditional
performing and then playing in
places like
this.
RACHEL BARTON PINE: Absolutely.
Well, yes, I think more and more
artists,
especially with the younger
generation, are
really understanding the value
of community
engagement. If we only played
for the converted,
we would be not honoring our
gifts to the
fullest extent.
JEFFREY BROWN: One spirit lifted
today, Ray
Simmons, who told us of falling
on hard times
and finding hope in Pine's music
and his own.
Do you have to hold onto
something?
RAY SIMMONS, The Community for
Creative Non-Violence:
You have to hold onto something.
You have
to hold onto your sanity.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
RAY SIMMONS: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: For you, it
sounds like you
hold onto your music too.
RAY SIMMONS: I hold onto my
music quite often.
That's what gets me through,
knowing that
I'm going to -- yes, I'm going
to play my
way out and sing my way out of
this place,
for sure, for sure.
JEFFREY BROWN: Pine started
young. She gave
her first recital at age 5,
played with a
professional orchestra at 7, and
with one
of the great ones, the Chicago
Symphony, in
a concert of young performers at
age 10.
MAN: And now super-duper Rachel
Barton makes
her debut with the Chicago
Symphony Orchestra.
(APPLAUSE)
JEFFREY BROWN: In recent years,
she formed
a foundation to help what she
calls poor prodigies
with things not covered by
traditional scholarships:
accompaniment fees, sheet music,
transportation
to competitions.
To date, she's helped 70 young
people. Another
project, Global HeartStrings,
supports aspiring
musicians in developing
countries such as
Haiti.
RACHEL BARTON PINE: Music
programs here in
America, we kind of take for
granted, like
rosin to put on your bow hair,
or, you know,
a shoulder rest, so that your
violin will
sit on your body properly.
JEFFREY BROWN: At 21, on the
brink of a major
career, the doors of a Chicago
commuter train
closed on the straps of her
violin case, trapping
Pine. The train dragged her 200
feet, severing
her left leg and mangling her
right foot.
Fifty surgeries later, she walks
on a prosthetic
leg.
RACHEL BARTON PINE: Really, of
course, it
was a case of corporate
negligence, because
there had been many, many prior
instances
before the day that I happened
to get hurt.
And, thankfully, they have
changed their safety
procedures. Everybody has
something they have
to deal with, and this just
happens to be
mine.
JEFFREY BROWN: And the concert
violinist is
also a heavy metal lover and
performer, a
regular headbanger, here playing
Metallica's
"One."
RACHEL BARTON PINE: So, at
first, it was like
the mainstream bands, but then I
started to
get into the classic thrash
groups like Anthrax,
Megadeth, Slayer, early
Metallica, Pantera
(INAUDIBLE). Like, this music
just grabbed
me. It was so intense.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you were
playing classical
music, playing Bach during the
day, and then
at 10:00, you're listening to...
RACHEL BARTON PINE: Anthrax.
JEFFREY BROWN: Anthrax.
RACHEL BARTON PINE: So, it
sounds silly to
say I relaxed to this like
headbanging metal,
but, yes, I could just turn off
my brain and
rock out.
I started playing these things
on my instrument
and realized, wait a sec, this
is actually
very sophisticated music.
JEFFREY BROWN: For us, she
played Ozzy Osbourne's
"Crazy Train."
Maybe, Pine says, she can help
bridge these
disparate musical worlds.
RACHEL BARTON PINE: One of my
goals has to
been to get fellow headbangers
out to the
symphony. There is nothing more
intense than
100 people on stage playing the
Tchaikovsky
Violin Concerto. And, you know,
it's just
an experience like none other.
JEFFREY BROWN: A hundred people
on stage,
or one at a homeless shelter,
where Rachel
Barton Pine gave residents a
taste of her
newly released album, her 30th,
called "Testament:
Bach's Sonatas and Partitas for
Solo Violin."
In Washington, D.C., I'm Jeffrey
Brown for
the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Heavy metal on
the violin.
And you can watch all of Rachel
Barton Pine's
version of "Crazy Train" on Art
Beat. That's
online at PBS.org/NewsHour.
And for more online: Rembrandt
retold. A video
artist has tied the 17th century
Dutch painter's
work to a modern story, one of
cancer, tragedy
and growing up in South Central
Los Angeles.
You can view the touching piece
on our home
page.
And more from our Race Matters
series. Journalists
share their experience reporting
on race and
policing. Watch highlights from
a town hall
hosted by special correspondent
Charlayne
Hunter-Gault.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs
from our PBS colleagues.
Tonight on "Washington Week": a
deep dive
into 2016 politics and the
mystery known as
delegate math, why clinching a
party's nomination
has more to do with securing
delegates than
winning primaries and caucuses.
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend": how
one Rust Belt
city is trying to save itself
one house at
a time.
NARRATOR: This house on the
south side of
Youngstown has been vacant for
eight years.
Now it's being torn down. These
demolitions
are part of a citywide plan to
eliminate blight
and rebuild.
Since the 1950s, Youngstown's
population has
declined by 60 percent.
Thousands of empty
homes have been left behind. So,
in 2009,
the city created a new
nonprofit, the Youngstown
Neighborhood Development
Corporation, or YNDC.
IAN BENISTON, Executive
Director, Youngstown
Neighborhood Development
Corporation: We don't
go around talking about utopian
visions. We're
dealing with the real basics
here. We just
got to get neighborhoods cleaned
up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow
night on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday,
when the Supreme Court hears
argument on President
Obama's executive orders to keep
undocumented
immigrants in the United States.
We will analyze
a special two-hour court
session.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.